CS 4440 – Operating Systems
Project 2 Presentation Transcript

Students:
Esmeralda Amado
Cristian Hernandez Juan
Gustavo Trejo

INTRODUCTION

Hello, our names are Esmeralda Amado, Cristian Hernandez Juan, and Gustavo Trejo. This is our presentation for CS 4440 Operating Systems Project 2.

Our project contains three synchronization programs written in C. The three programs are the Producer-Consumer problem, the Mother Hubbard problem, and the Airline Passengers problem. We used POSIX threads, mutex locks, semaphores, and condition variables to coordinate the threads and prevent race conditions and busy waiting.

We also included one Makefile that compiles all three C programs.

To compile the project, we open a terminal in the project folder and enter:

make

The Makefile searches for all files ending in .c and creates an executable with the same base name as each source file. It uses GCC with warning and debugging flags, and it links the pthread and real-time libraries.

PROBLEM 1 – PRODUCER-CONSUMER

The first program is producer_consumer.c.

To run it, we enter:

./producer_consumer

This program demonstrates the bounded-buffer Producer-Consumer problem.

The shared buffer has a maximum size of 10 characters, and the program produces and consumes a total of 50 items. The producer generates printable letters beginning with A. After reaching Z, it starts again at A.

The buffer is implemented as a circular buffer. The variable “in” identifies where the producer inserts the next item, and the variable “out” identifies where the consumer removes the next item.

Three synchronization objects are used.

First, a mutex protects the shared buffer, the indexes, and the buffer count. This ensures that the producer and consumer cannot modify shared data at the same time.

Second, the emptySlots semaphore counts the number of empty positions in the buffer. It begins at 10 because the buffer is initially empty.

Third, the fullSlots semaphore counts the number of occupied positions. It begins at zero because no items have been produced yet.

The consumer thread is created first. The program pauses for one second before creating the producer, allowing the output to demonstrate that the consumer must wait when the buffer is empty.

Before producing an item, the producer waits on emptySlots. It then locks the mutex, inserts the item, updates the circular index and item count, prints the result, and unlocks the mutex. Finally, it posts to fullSlots to tell the consumer that an item is available.

Before consuming an item, the consumer waits on fullSlots. It then locks the mutex, removes an item, updates the circular index and item count, prints the result, and unlocks the mutex. Finally, it posts to emptySlots to tell the producer that another buffer position is available.

The producer sleeps for 100,000 microseconds after each item, while the consumer sleeps for 500,000 microseconds. This makes the producer faster than the consumer, so the buffer eventually fills and the producer must wait.

After both threads finish, the main function joins them, destroys the mutex and semaphores, and prints that all items were produced and consumed.

This solution prevents race conditions, buffer overflow, and buffer underflow without using busy waiting.

PROBLEM 2 – MOTHER HUBBARD

The second program is mh.c.

To run it, we enter:

./mh N

The letter N represents the number of days to simulate. For example:

./mh 2

This program simulates Mother Hubbard and Father Hubbard taking care of 12 children.

The mother has five tasks that must be completed in order:

1. Wake up every child.
2. Feed every child breakfast.
3. Send every child to school.
4. Give every child dinner.
5. Give every child a bath.

The mother completes one type of task for all 12 children before moving to the next task.

The father has two tasks for each child:

1. Read the child a book.
2. Tuck the child into bed.

The program uses two threads: one mother thread and one father thread. It also uses two semaphores.

The motherSemaphore begins with a value of one. This allows the mother to begin the first day immediately.

The fatherSemaphore begins with a value of zero. This causes the father to sleep until the mother finishes bathing a child.

Every time the mother gives a child a bath, she posts to the fatherSemaphore. The father then wakes up, reads to that child, and tucks the child into bed. Because the mother posts once after each bath, the father processes the children in the correct order while the mother may continue bathing the next child.

After completing all five tasks for all children, the mother prints that she is taking a nap.

After the father has read to and tucked in all 12 children, he prints that the day is over. He then posts to the motherSemaphore, waking the mother for the next day.

The command-line argument is validated using strtol. The program rejects missing arguments, nonnumeric input, zero, negative values, and values larger than an integer can store.

After the requested number of days is complete, the main function joins both threads, destroys both semaphores, and prints that the simulation is complete.

This design guarantees the required task order and synchronizes the parents without busy waiting.

PROBLEM 3 – AIRLINE PASSENGERS

The third program is airline.c.

To run it, we enter:

./airline P B S F

The arguments represent:

P: number of passengers
B: number of baggage handlers
S: number of security screeners
F: number of flight attendants

For example:

./airline 10 2 3 2

This example creates 10 passengers, 2 baggage handlers, 3 security screeners, and 2 flight attendants.

Every passenger must complete three stages in order:

1. Baggage processing
2. Security screening
3. Boarding

A separate passenger thread is created for every passenger. Worker threads are also created for the baggage handlers, security screeners, and flight attendants.

Each processing stage has its own queue. The Stage structure stores a circular queue of passenger pointers, the queue capacity, head and tail indexes, the current count, a mutex, a condition variable, and progress information.

The mutex protects each stage queue so that multiple threads cannot add or remove passengers at the same time.

The not_empty condition variable allows worker threads to sleep when their queue is empty. When a passenger enters a queue, the program signals the condition variable and wakes one worker. This avoids busy waiting.

Each passenger also has three private semaphores:

baggage_done
security_done
boarding_done

These semaphores begin at zero.

When a passenger arrives, the passenger enters the baggage queue and waits on baggage_done. A baggage handler removes the passenger from the queue, processes the baggage, and posts to that passenger’s baggage_done semaphore.

The passenger then enters the security queue and waits on security_done. A security screener processes the passenger and posts to security_done.

Next, the passenger enters the boarding queue and waits on boarding_done. A flight attendant processes the passenger and posts to boarding_done.

After the boarding semaphore is posted, the passenger prints that they are seated and relaxing.

Each stage counts how many passengers it has processed. When the processed count reaches the total number of passengers, the stage marks itself as done and broadcasts its condition variable. This wakes any remaining worker threads so they can detect that no more passengers are coming and terminate correctly.

A separate print mutex is used so output from multiple threads does not become mixed together on the same line.

The main function validates that all four arguments are positive. It initializes the three stages, dynamically allocates all worker and passenger thread arrays, creates the worker threads, and then creates the passenger threads.

The main thread waits until all passenger and worker threads finish. Once every passenger is seated, the program prints:

All passengers are seated. The plane takes off!

Finally, the program destroys all passenger semaphores, stage mutexes, condition variables, and the print mutex. It also frees all dynamically allocated memory.

This solution allows passengers to move through different stages concurrently while still enforcing the correct baggage, security, and boarding order.

CONCLUSION

In conclusion, all three programs demonstrate important operating-system synchronization concepts.

The Producer-Consumer program uses a mutex and counting semaphores to safely manage a bounded circular buffer.

The Mother Hubbard program uses semaphores to enforce ordering between two cooperating threads without busy waiting.

The Airline Passengers program uses multiple passenger and worker threads, synchronized queues, mutexes, condition variables, and passenger-specific semaphores to model a multistage concurrent system.

Together, these programs demonstrate thread creation, mutual exclusion, semaphore synchronization, condition-variable waiting, resource cleanup, and safe access to shared data.

Thank you.
